# cql-transpiler

Evaluation of Clinical Quality Language

## Overview

The transpiler workflow is as follows

1. CQL text files are loaded into memory
2. CQL text files are converted into CQL Abstract Syntax Trees (ASTs) in memory
3. CQL ASTs are converted into a "generic" AST that can be used to output code in any query language.
4. The generic ASTs are rendered in text that can be parsed as either jinja or DBT.
5. The generic ASTs are converted into the code for a specific query language-- for example, sparkSQL.

## Use: Testing Manual SQL Output

* Replace the contents of the resources/cql folder with the CQL libraries to be transpiled.
* Run the main function of gov.va.transpiler.jinja.Transpiler
* If an error complains about files already existing in the "resources/jinja/generated" folder delete any jinja files present in that folder and re-run the main function
* At this point, jinja files corresponding to the transpiled CQL file and its dependencies will be present in the "resources/jinja/generated" folder.
* For every measure to be translated inside the root CQL folder, create a jinja file that references that macro inside the "resources/jinja/test_models" folder.
* execute the command "python test_models.py" inside the command line
* look inside the "resources/test_target" folder for the output

## Use: Integration with DBT

* Replace the contents of the resources/cql folder with the CQL libraries to be transpiled.
* Specify the root CQL library to transpile inside the "cqlLibraryToTranspile" variable inside of the "transpiler/src/main/java/gov/va/transpiler/jinja/Transpiler.java" file.
* Run the main function of gov.va.transpiler.jinja.Transpiler
* If an error complains about files already existing in the "resources/jinja/generated" folder delete any jinja files present in that folder and re-run the main function
* At this point, jinja files corresponding to the transpiled CQL file and its dependencies will be present in the "resources/jinja/generated" folder.
* Copy the contents of the "jinja" folder inside an existing DBT project.
* create dbt model files as usual calling the macros created inside the transpiled CQL library files
* compile DBT as usual

### Design

The CQL transpiler functions in two steps. First, it uses java to take a CQL file and render its logic as an AST within jinja. Then, it uses a python script to compile the jinja file into a target language using a jinja macros file tailored to produce output in that language.

The CQL-to-jinja portion of the transpiler assumes that a macros file exists containing certain prerequisite functions to enable translation into any given target language.

### Design - CQL-to-Jinja

The "transpiler" module and specifically the "Transpiler" class are the entry point into the transpiler. The main function of the program:

#### Overview

1. Loads CQL text files into memory
1. Supplies the loaded files to the sparkcql-cqf module
1. The sparkcql-cql module invokes the cqlframework library code
1. The cqlframework library code creates an AST (Abstract Syntax Tree) for the supplied CQL
1. The transpiler module transverses the CQL AST to create a customized, intermediate AST
1. The transpiler module transverses the Intermediate AST to render it as jinja/DBT text.

### Design - Jinja-to-Target

All macros files must satisfy certain requirements to interface with jinja generated by the CQL-to-jinja portion of the transpiler.

#### Design patterns:

Jinja macros files should implement transpilation logic using an object-oriented programming paradigm.
Jinja does not support object-oriented programming natively, but it can be hacked to allow it through the clever use of namespaces.
To create an an object's "constructor", create a macro function that sets certain variables on a namespace.
To create an object that "inherits" from another object, in its constructor, run the parent constructor on the namespace.
To create a function that returns one or more values, create a macro that accepts a "carrier" namespace and sets its return values inside that namespace without printing anything.

#### Prerequisites

##### State

The jinja AST rendering process does not assume any particular behavior from the State class. The State class exists for the macro file's use.

##### Operator

The Operator class must support the following members:

    + operator - namespace (extends from Operator)
    + children - list of operatorValues

Classes extending from the operator class should support other data passed on from the CQL version of the operators.

##### OperatorHandler

The OperatorHandler class must support the following members:

print(state, operatorValues) - void macro
    + state - namespace (nullable)
    + operatorValues - dictionary

The operatorValues dictionary should be treated as essentially a class, that always contains at least the following members:
    + operator - namespace (extends from Operator)
    + children - list of operatorValues

### Design - Jinja-to-SparkSQL

The macros file that targets SparkSQL implements its behavior using the following classes and standards.

#### State

State - namespace
    + context - String (scoped)
    + functionArguments - Dictionary<String, Dictionary<String, ?>> (scoped)
    + aliasContext - String

note: "scoped" variables should be stored and reset before descending into any branch of the AST where they're modified.
To do so, use the following pattern:

{%- set previousVariableName = state.variableName %}
{%- set state.variableName = newValue %}
{{ function(state) }}
{%- set state.variableName = previousVariableName %}

#### DataType

DataType is an enum.

Values:
    SIMPLE = "simple"
    ENCAPSULATED = "encapsulated"
    TABLE = "table"
    INHERITED = "inherited"
    STATEMENT = "statement"
    UNKNOWN = "unknown"

#### Operator

Operator - namespace
    + getDataType(carrier, arguments) - macro (returns DataType)
        + carrier - namespace
            + return - string
        + arguments - dictionary extending OperatorValues
    + print(state, arguments)
        + state - State
        + arguments - dictionary extending OperatorValues

    Potential data types:

#### OperatorHandler

print(state, operatorValues) - macro
    + state - namespace (nullable)
    + operatorValues - dictionary

**Under Development**